---
title: Syllabus
layout: single
toc: true
toc_label: "Syllabus Contents"
---

## Purpose and Objectives

Why do some tasks seem more difficult to compute than others? In CS
3800 you will learn to understand formal treatments of the notions of
computation, computability, computational power, and efficiency that
will give you the tools to answer this question. You will learn to
understand both intuitively and formally simple models of computation.
You will gain expertise with mathematical proofs and common proof
techniques, and you will also come to understand the connections
between these theoretical models and computational tasks in common
programming languages.

After this course you will know how to think about:

  1. What's going to be an easy task, and what's going to be a
     complicated job?
  2. How can we compose programs together?
  3. As computers get more powerful, how much easier do various tasks
     (e.g. chess, password cracking) get?

We call this course "theory", but the subject is imminently practical,
and *about* the practice of computing. The early field of computer
science carved these areas of computationally inspired mathematics out
from the broader field as their own subject.

Research in this field concerns how to recognize and classify
difficult tasks, and what options we have when we are faced with a
computationally difficult task. For instance, we could:

  1. Perhaps, slightly change the problem statement to an easier
     problem. 
  2. Perhaps, satisfy ourselves with some "good enough" sub-optimal
     solution that's easier to solve.
  3. Think broadly and be less pessimistic: if the problem is only
     really difficult in some worst-case scenarios but usually not so
     bad, we might just go with the solution we have.

## Contact

I strongly recommend that for general questions that might benefit
others, we communicate via [Piazza](###Piazza). A great regular way to
reach out for help is via our [office hours]({{ site.baseurl
}}/office-hours/).

The best way to get in contact for personal, private (FERPA, etc)
messages is via my email address
[jhemann@northeastern.edu](mailto:jhemann@northeastern.edu). You
should expect a response within 48 hours. You will find that I am
faster with [Piazza](###Piazza). In fact, if I deem it even
potentially useful to others, I will (1) anonymize your letter, (2)
post the question and answer on Piazza, and (3) forward you the link.
If you're interested in PL research, logic, logic program, automated
theorem proving or the like, please let me know on that too! [I'm
excited to talk more about it all
:-)](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=SePR8OkAAAAJ)

## Required Texts 

We will use the 3rd Edition of Sipser's [Introduction to the Theory of
Computation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Introduction_to_the_Theory_of_Computation)
text for this class. There are courses where you do not need the
putatively required textbook. In this course, the text is really,
actually necessary both to complete the required readings and also
portions of the homework assignments. This textbook is widely
available, including at the [Northeastern University
bookstore](https://northeastern.bncollege.com/shop/northeastern/home).
As you read, please also take care to pay attention for the author's
[known errata](http://www-math.mit.edu/~sipser/itoc-errs3.1.html). You
can find *an* edition of this text [available as an E-book from the
Snell
library](https://onesearch.library.northeastern.edu/primo-explore/fulldisplay?docid=NEU_ALMA21174526980001401&context=L&vid=NU&lang=en_US&search_scope=default_scope&adaptor=Local%20Search%20Engine&tab=default_tab&query=any,contains,Introduction%20to%20the%20theory%20of%20computation).

## Grade Breakdown

I will assign overall course grades as follows:

     | Category                  | Weight (%) |
     |---------------------------+------------|
     | Lecture Quizzes           |         20 |
     | Exams                     |         35 |
     | Homework                  |         45 |
     | TRACE                     |          1 | 
     | Total                     |        101 |

I will calculate overall numeric grade according to the [Northeastern
grading schema]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/images/northeastern-grading-schema.jpg). Additionally, there
will be a "curve", but I will determine it only at the end of the
semester. This curve will potentially raise grades above those
described here, but will not lower them. Therefore, the total grade
shown on Canvas does not necessarily reflects the worst-case scenario
of the letter grade you will get at the end of the semester. This
means I *cannot* give you a more precise estimate of your grade than
what you calculate from the raw score. I detail below the
aforementioned individual components of your final grade.

I will base some portions of your homework and lecture quiz
grades on completion and submission of the relevant exercises. I will
base the remaining portion of each on correctness. 

### Total Running Grade Calculation

We will track your calculated grades on
[Canvas](https://canvas.northeastern.edu/). You will have an
approximate assessment of your *current* grade status before the
Add/Drop deadline. 

### Collaborative Course Construction and Feedback

I *want* you all's feedback and input. I am open to suggestions and
changes; I consider this preliminary until the end of the first week
of class. You can see any and all changes on the course website's
repository. I cannot promise that we will act on all suggestions, and
even those we find compelling may not be implementable as we go.

## Participation

I expect you to attend each lecture. We will not take attendance as
such, but attendance is a prerequisite for participation, a
substantial portion of your grade for this course. I expect students
to attend every class and remain in class throughout the duration of
the session. Your absence or tardiness will impact your ability to
achieve course objectives which could hurt your course grade. An
absence, excused or unexcused, does not relieve a student of any
course requirement. Lecture content quizzes serve as proxies for
participation and thus attendance, as well as to gauge students'
understanding. To account for illnesses, other commitments that come
up, and all the other vagaries of life, I'll drop 5/25 of these
quizzes for you all. I don't know that I'd be comfortable dropping 1/5
of them under normal circumstances, but at least in the current
situation that seems like a reasonable precaution. If you think you're
sick, please do get yourself checked and be safe.

### Oral Explanation and Participation

Proof has a [social component](https://www.jstor.org/stable/3482651).
As such, part of your grade will also include your participating by
communicating with your colleagues in lecture. These can take the form
of small group "breakout room" work, open class votes and discussions,
or walk us all through some of your answers.

### Lecture Quizzes/Polls

Expect to have regular content quizzes during or toward the end of
lecture. These act as a forcing function, encouraging attention to
lectures and/or the ancillary readings and to alert me to students'
difficulties. Sometimes we take these for completion, others for
accuracy. These lecture quizzes belongs under your participation
grade.

## Homework

Homework, consisting of problem sets assigned roughly once per week,
is an essential part of the course. We give a few (randomly varying)
extra minutes to account for network time disagreements, but beyond
this homework assignments are due strictly on the day and time listed
on the assignment. These will usually be on Tuesday at 10pm. Some
other assignments will require hand-written proofs; we fall back to
these when programming assignments add more difficult than the
learning they would bestow.

To universally, uniformly and preemptively account for any number of
situations that arise, *I will drop every student's lowest homework
assignment grade.* This absolution for one assignment *is* our
late/etc homework clemency. I shan't accept late submissions except
under the most exceptional of circumstances (family emergencies,
hospitalizations, the like)---if that comes up please see me. We are,
however happy to go over these missed submissions with you at office
hours. 

You should make every effort to complete and submit each assignment.
If you are struggling with an assignment, it best to turn in what you
can complete and to seek help. Homework assignments will build on one
another conceptually, and some later assignments require the
successful completion of problems from earlier ones. **Do not fall
behind.** If you feel yourself falling behind, seek help immediately
and take advantage of office hours, your classmates, ancillary
readings, and additional support. Follow both the general homework
guidelines, as well as any special instructions given on the
assignment itself.

We allow an unlimited number of submissions per assignment, up to the
deadline.

We will evaluate your work both for correctness using an automated
test suite when possible and also by manual hand inspection. We
provide you an autograder test suite for each assignment. This
autograder merely ensures that your programs compute the correct
answers.

### Exams 

You will have two long-form exams. I have yet to determine our exams'
format. Students' suggestions led to several improvements in how I
conduct this course, and your continued suggestions will help lead to
continued improvements. These exams are at the dates laid out on the
calendar and as discussed in class; we will not have a final exam.

We added an additional, optional final. We will score the exam portion
of your grade as the best two out of three. 

### TRACE evaluations

I encourage students to take time and submit TRACE evaluations. Your
time is busy at the end of the term when these are available. In order
to fairly compensate you for that time without violating the integrity
or anonymity of the TRACE system, if 85% or more of the enrolled
students complete these TRACE evaluations, then I shall add a point
onto the class-wide final average.

#### Recording 

I do not permit electronic video and/or audio recording of class.
Unless the student obtains permission from the instructor electronic
video and/or audio recording of class is prohibited. If permission is
granted, any distribution of the recording is prohibited. Students
with specific electronic recording accommodations authorized by the
[DRC](academic-accommodations) do not require instructor permission;
however, the instructor must be notified of any such accommodation
prior to recording. Any distribution of such recordings is prohibited.
Obviously I cannot [stop you](https://obsproject.com/), but it's to
both our benefits.

## Additional Support 

In addition to lecture, we provide the following additional resources
for students to avail themselves. Do consider taking regular advantage
of them.

### Scheduled Office Hours

Course personnel will make ourselves available for 4-6 hours of
[office hours]({{ site.baseurl}}/office-hours/) available weekly,
concentrated toward assignment due dates. If our office hours schedule
in particularly ill-suited to your class schedule, let me know and we
may be able to adjust them. As per current university guidance, we
will hold these office hours remotely.

### Gradescope

We will be using Gradescope this term, which allows us to provide fast
and accurate feedback on your work. Homework will be submitted through
Gradescope, and homework and exam grades will be returned through
Gradescope. As soon as grades are posted, you will be notified
immediately so that you can log in and see your feedback. For
clarification on grades, please meet with your grader during office
hours.

To access Gradescope, click the Log In button on the Gradescope
website and enter your university email. Then enter your existing
password if you have one or click Forgot Password to reset it or
create one for the first time.

### Piazza Forums

Outside of office hours, you should utilize the class's Piazza forums
for questions. We have disabled private messages to instructors, but
you can choose to remain anonymous to the class when asking questions.
We prefer Piazza over email, as it gives other students the
opportunity to learn from those same anwers. Please restrict your
questions to those that do not ``give away the punchline'' to a
homework question. For more sensitive questions, or administrative
issues that should addressed in private, please email me at the
address listed on the front of this syllabus.

### Ancillary Videos and Optional Texts

The theory of computation is central to the practice of computer
science. Computer scientists have understood this for decades. As
such, instructors have covered these materials in a wide variety of
styles and media which redounds to all our benefit. Whenever I have
them, I will link to some best-in-breed videos that explain the topics
from class in a complementary manner, and may also provide sections
from other texts. Neither will cover topics precisely the way we do in
lecture. Their presentations will differ in technical details and
particulars of syntax. However, both provide material that translates
to what we do in class. Some students may choose to use these videos
or readings after lectures to supplement their understanding.
Especially diligent students may use them to preview the lecture and
be that much farther ahead. In the rare circumstance you must miss
lecture, these may help supplement your understanding from lab, our
additional support, and perhaps lecture notes from a friend.

## Academic Integrity Policy

Students of course play an integral part in ensuring they receive the
full benefit of their coursework. The students of 3800 are certainly
beholden to the academic integrity policies of [Northeastern
University](http://www.northeastern.edu/osccr/academic-integrity-policy/)
and as laid out in the [student
handbook](https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/sites.northeastern.edu/dist/8/569/files/2020/09/2021-22-UG-Student-Handbook.pdf),
the [Khoury
College](https://www.khoury.northeastern.edu/information-for-overview/current-undergrad/undergraduate-advising-academic-support/academic-policies/).

### Teamwork and Collaboration

You can work with up to 2 others, for a total of 3 people in a group.
You aren't required to work with anyone else if you don't wish. You
can work with students from any other sections you wish. You will
submit a single submission for your entire group, and it is your
responsibility to include the names of your group members.

Do bear in mind pair programming is a central part of the
undergraduate curriculum here. Pair programming is not intended to
divide-and-conquer, but instead for students to collaboratively solve
problems together. You are only twice as fast working separately if
the typing is by and away the hardest part of programming. Which it is
not.

Whatever size group you work in or how you meet you should still plan
to [all work synchronously and simultaneously
together](https://www.remotemobprogramming.org/). Note a larger group
is not necessarily better. You should at least try to do some of this
wholly on your own. It's good to have a baseline early on to know [if
you have this material under your belt or if you are getting
lost](https://martinfowler.com/articles/on-pair-programming.html#couldIReallyDoThisByMyself).
Ultimately, you should be responsible for and have a firm
understanding of all work submitted under your name. You should be
able to demonstrate this mastery when we request.

#### Group Dynamics and Difficulties

These groups are not fixed; you should feel free to adjust them to
your own need and benefit on a per-week basis. If you find that your
group is no longer able to work effectively together or that not
everyone can equally participate, please bring this to your grader's
attention. Your grader and/or instructor may have suggestions about
how to improve your group cohesion, or may use the staff privilege to
reallocate group members.

## Academic Accommodations 

If you have accommodations from the [Disability Resource Center
(DRC)](http://www.northeastern.edu/drc/) please submit your Professor
Notification Letter to me by email, preferably within the first two
weeks of the quarter, so I can do my part to help you achieve equal
access in this course. I am eager to discuss ways we can ensure your
full participation.

I encourage all students who may benefit from learning more about DRC
services to [contact the
DRC](http://www.northeastern.edu/drc/#fp-blog-entry:~:text=Contact%20Information).

## Equity and Compliance

One of our responsibilities in supporting student learning 360° is to
help create a safe learning environment both in person and
virtually. You should carefully consult the university's [relevant
policies](https://www.northeastern.edu/ouec/title-ix-policy-2/), and
if you have or experience any violations of the above I encourage you
to take full advantage of the [university
resources](https://www.northeastern.edu/ouec/resources/main-campus-resources/).

It is also important that you know that federal regulations and
University policy require me to promptly convey any information about
certain kinds of misconduct known to me to our Deputy Title IX
Coordinator or IU’s Title IX Coordinator. In that event, they will
work with a small number of others on campus to ensure that
appropriate measures are taken and resources are made available to the
student who may have been harmed. Protecting a student’s privacy is of
utmost concern, and all involved will only share information with
those that need to know to ensure the University can respond and
assist. 

## Acknowledgments 

I have taken much of the design and execution of this course from
[Stephen Chang](https://www.umb.edu/stephen_chang)'s version of a
similar class at UMass Boston. Some slides and material therein is
borrowed from, in no particular order: Debasis Mitra (FIT), Costas
Busch (RPI), Stephen Chang (UMB), and John MacCormick. [Lindsey
Kuper](https://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~lkuper/) inspires some of this site
and syllabus as well as being all-around inspirational.


![In the syllabus]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/syllabus.gif
"Might just be worth checking.")


