---
title: "Homework 9"
layout: single
---

### Objectives 

  - Explore text register machines and elementary programs
  - Construct programs to populate registers and manipulate register data
  - Connect meta-programming theory in Sipser to actual practice
  - Explore applications of s-m-n and recursion theorems. 

**Homework Problems**

* [Basic program interaction](#1-basic-program-interaction) (1 pt) 

* [Clear and move](#2-clear-and-move) (1 pt)

* [Write to R2](#3-write-to-r2) (2 pts)

* [A program to write a program](#a-program-to-write-a-program) (2 pts)

* [self\#](#self\#) (4 pts)

**Total**: 10 points

**Submitting**

Submit this assignment on [Gradescope](https://www.gradescope.com).

The submission should contain only a zip archive of your code and the
associated README. Donâ€™t forget to submit a `README` file containing
the required information, including time spent and resources
consulted.

The submission must include the following files (**NOTE**: everything is
case-sensitive):

* `basic-program-interactions.trm` 

* `clear-and-move.trm`

* `write-to-r2.trm`

* `program-to-write-a-program.trm`

* `self-hash.trm`

* a `README` containing the required information,

## Notes on readings.

The assigned readings and reference material (see Enrichment page or
schedule for links) reference a different, web-based interpreter. The
Enrichment page links to the interpreter we will use. Simply download
the repository and `make` in that directory. Some parts of the reading
that reference how to interact with the interpreter will thus be
incorrect, and you can skip the "Using the interpreter" section. To
provide our interpreter a program, we pass the program in using
`printf` and pipe `|` it in to the `trm` program. By default the `trm`
program will execute it's input for up to 1000 steps. You can write
your programs in a file and then `cat` them into the interpreter too,
if you wish.


```
$ printf "1##1##1#1#1##1##1##1#1#1##" | ./trm 
Add# 1
...
R1: ##11###11#

Done. Executed 10 instructions.
##11###11#
$
```

To run with automation, provide `trm` two arguments: first, the
maximum number of steps to execute, and then the frames per second of
an animation of the machine's operation. 



## 1. Basic program interaction 

In lecture, we looked at programs to add data to trm registers, and a
program to move data from R2 to R1. Write a trm program that will fill
R1 with the data `1#1#`, fill R2 with the data `11#1##`, and R3 with
the datum `1#`. 

**Your Tasks**

* Write a file `basic-program-interactions.trm` containing a 1#
  program to write the aforementioned data to the appropriate
  registers, with all other registers empty. 
  
Your solution will be tested as follows:

* **Example**:

  ```
  cat basic-program-interactions.trm | ./trm | tail -n 6 | head -n 3
  ```

  Output: 

  ```
  Coming
  ```

## 2. Clear and move

Write a program that clears R3 and then swaps the contents of R1 and
R2 (using the now-empty R3). You can test this program by, for
instance, first passing your solution to problem 1 to `trm` followed
immediately by your solution to this problem and ensure that you get
the correct output.

```
$ cat <(basic-program-interaction.trm) <(clear-and-move.trm) | ./trm 
```

**Your Tasks**

* Write a file `clear-and-move.trm` containing a 1# program to swap
  the contents of R1 and R2 emptying R3. Your program should terminate
  with the values of R1 and R2 swapped, and with all other registers
  empty.
  
Your solution will be tested as follows:

* **Example**:

  ```
  cat <(basic-program-interaction.trm) <(clear-and-move.trm) | ./trm | tail -n 5 | head -n 2
  ```

  Output: 

  ```
  Coming
  ```


## 3. Write to R2

Create a program write-to-2 with the following feature: If we start
write-to-2 with x in R1 and R2 empty, we eventually halt with a word
$y = \phi_{\textrm{write-to-2}}(x)$ in R2 and all other registers
empty; moreover, running y with R2 empty results in x back in R2 (not
R1) and all other registers empty.


**Your Tasks**

* Write a file `write-to-2.trm` containing a 1# program to swap
  the contents of R1 and R2 emptying R3. Your program should terminate
  with the values of R1 and R2 swapped, and with all other registers
  empty.
  
Your solution will be tested as follows:

* **Example**:

  ```
  cat <(printf "???") <(write-to-2.trm) | ./trm | tail -n 5 | head -n 2
  ```

  Output: 

  ```
  Coming
  ```

* **Example**:

  ```
  cat <(printf "???") <(write-to-2.trm) | ./trm | tail -n 4 | head -n 1 | ./trm
  ```

  Output: 

  ```
  Coming
  ```


## 4. A program to write a program. 

Look carefully at your solution to problem 1. The data `1#1#` and
`11#1##` are actually also code---these are 1# programs. Your solution
to problem 1 is an instance of using a 1# program to write another 1#
program. Here we will work with and use `write` and `diag` to
construct other program-writing programs. I STILL NEED TO FIGURE OUT
SOMETHING GOOD TO DO WITH THIS.


## 5. self\# 

Write a program p which, when started on all empty registers writes
itself to R1 but rather writes itself followed by a `#` symbol. In
other words, $\phi_{p}()  = p + \\#$

**Your Tasks**

* Write a file `self-hash.trm` containing a 1# program that, when
  executed in a machine with all registers empty, writes to R1 itself
  followed by a `#` symbol and all other registers empty.
  
Your solution will be tested as follows:

* **Example**:

  ```
  self-hash.trm | ./trm | tail -n 1
  ```

  Output: 

  ```
  Coming
  ```

* **Example**:

  ```
  cat self-hash.trm | ./trm | tail -n 1 | sed 's/.$//' | ./trm `
  ``

  Output: 

  ```
  Coming
  ```
